[RFC] Introducing Dual Licensing strategy in Emmett and Pongo (#260)
event-driven-io/emmett: rfc/002-License.md

Second, strategy. AGPLv3 allows projects to legally incorporate improvements from forks. You can't take BSD-licensed code from Valkey and add it to SSPL Redis. But between compatible copyleft licenses? That works. Yes, also if there's more than one license to the same code.

The dual licensing trend represents adaptation to this reality. It's not ideal, but it's pragmatic.

## The Licenses Explained

### Permissive Licenses: The Current Problem

Apache 2.0, MIT, and BSD say: take this code, do whatever you want, just give attribution. This generosity becomes vulnerability when cloud providers monetise your work without reciprocating.

### AGPLv3: Network Copyleft

[AGPLv3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.html) extends GPL's copyleft to network use. If you modify AGPLv3 software and users interact with it over a network, you must provide the source code of your modifications.

"Users interacting over a network" means any service where users access the functionality - web applications, APIs, any network protocol. This applies only to modifications of the licensed software itself.

> Many developers misunderstand this. They believe AGPLv3 requires open sourcing their entire application. It doesn't. If you build a banking system using Emmett, your business logic remains proprietary. Only if you modify Emmett's core event sourcing engine and expose that modified version as a service would you need to share those Emmett modifications.

Reviewer: More in [the GPL FAQ](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html#IfLibraryIsGPL). There is [the LGPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Lesser_General_Public_License) which behaves more like what you're describing here.

With Emmett and Pongo, I've been transparent from the start: these need to be sustainable for me to focus on them. Keeping Emmett unlicensed was deliberate - avoiding the permissive-to-restrictive transition that breaks trust.

Now, with meaningful community contributions, I'm formalizing what I've always intended: a structure that's fair to contributors while enabling sustainable development.

## Risks and Trade-offs

### Fork Risk and External Managed service without contributing back

Cloud providers may fork rather than negotiate. Valkey, Open Search, and DocumentDB show this is real. There's still a risk that someone will just run managed service on unmodified Pongo and Emmett using AGPLv3 without contributing back. Still, they will need to make it a publicly available open source. Thanks to that we can get the improvements back. Also, all of that requires resources and community work and getting a buy-in from users. On the bright side, having this risk should be a trigger for me to plan better core project work and productize additional features.

### Adoption Barriers

> Some organisati ons prohibit AGPL or SSPL. The dual approach maximises compatibility, but some potential users will be lost. Better sustainable development with narrower adoption than broad adoption of an abandoned project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some organisations prohibit AGPL or SSPL. The dual approach maximises compatibility, but some potential users will be lost. Better sustainable development with narrower adoption than broad adoption of an abandoned project.
```
